so we're talking about m-43 today and
luckily it is actually in this poster
that I have a outside my office door
some of you might recognize this
constellation it's very recognizable
it's a Ryan this image is actually one
that I made the BBC stargazing live a
couple of years ago and basically we
asked people to go outside and take an
image of a Ryan like with whatever
camera kit they had so be an SLR or an
iPhone and send them in to us and then I
so stashed them all together and it was
like every photon counts and we made
this beautiful image and really cool
because you can tell that people have
really focused on the belt stars and so
they're really really sharp whereas the
other stars they'd be produced in the
top-left is like really fuzzy because
not as many people got it in the image
and so we don't have as much data about
that and so you have this kind of like
tunnel vision towards and the belt stars
you'll notice from the belt Orion's belt
also hangs the hunters sword and if we
follow that down we found today it's
Messier object do you like my nails this
week as well by the way there's a solar
system I got so excited when I realized
I had enough colors to do that so we got
the Sun Mercury Venus Earth Mars Jupiter
complete with the red spot Saturn Uranus
Neptune and then Voyager because I
wanted to use the silver Pluto isn't
silver I'm very pleased system so this
is that region of Orion that I just
pointed up and some of you might
recognize it some of you might be
thinking well that's the Orion Nebula
they've already done that Messier object
Becky what are you doing but actually
m-43 is also in this image as well so
this is m42 the Orion Nebula Megan did a
video on a couple years ago and this guy
here this one little star with this dust
Lane
that's m43 so it's kind of like the baby
sibling of m42
tiny little thing but it's a really
really interesting object in itself
actually so despite the fact that m42
gets all the attention
Penza m43 might be sort of just as
important for actually m42 existing in
the first place so here it is zoomed in
in all its glory and here's a lot more
spectacular
zooming that dust Lane is really
prominent and really strong but you'll
notice that mostly it's just one star
m43 is a star forming region it's one of
these sort of star-forming nebula very
similar to m42 in that respect and you
see this one star is really what's
creating this sort of like cavity around
m-43 and actually if you look at me
infrared which makes it look even cooler
so that previous image was actually just
sort of like this half over here but you
can see that one star has just blown out
this huge cavity and the reason we can
see that in the infrared is because in
the infrared you can see through the
dust that's getting in the way and
there's a lot of dust and all of these
like sort of star-forming nebula so this
one star is what we call a B star is
sort of the second highest class of
stars you can get not quite the hottest
but almost the hottest and basically
after it was formed it's thrown out huge
amounts of radiation and in this like
stellar wind and that's what's blown out
this really cool looking cavity in m-43
and you can really see that dust lanes
disappeared and what you're seeing here
is the gas that's now being illuminated
by that star in the very center so gooey
m43 is in Messier sub-objects despite
being just one star in the tiny tiny
nebula in comparison to the Orion Nebula
which obviously gets all the attention
but I found paper it's still in review
so it's only been posted to what we call
the Astronomy archive it's not been peer
reviewed and properly published yet but
what its conclusions are I think are
really really cool and it's all about
m42 and m43 a new look at the molecular
gas in m42 and m43 but basically what
they've done is they have looked at some
of the gas emission in these nebulae in
both m42 and m43 and they've been
looking at carbon monoxide emission so
obviously atoms absorb light and then
they give out light in a very specific
wavelength and you get this sort of peak
there a specific wavelength and that's
what they've been looking at and they've
been looking to see if it's blue shifted
or red shifted we've shifted as in like
a Doppler shift so the blue shifted
light is moving towards us and the
redshifted light is moving away from us
and they're trying to figure out what
kind of movement is going on in this big
complex star forming system of you know
this huge amount of gas and dust because
these things are sort of you know
years across so this is figure 15 and
what figure 15 is showing on the left
hand side here is the blue shifted
contours overlaid on that beautiful
image of M 41 and 43 and then the red
shifted contours on the right hand side
and so what they've said is that if you
look at this and where the blue shifting
components are and where the red shifted
components are you can then model in on
a computer what is actually going on in
in three dimensions with all these cloud
systems and when you do that you
actually find that M 43 has been
colliding where then 42 and so these
huge clouds of gas are sort of like
coming together and this is at great
speed so these kind of things travel you
know it sort of beyond the speed of
sound and when you do that you get shock
waves and shock waves are the things
that cause gasps you get really dense
come together and that's how you end up
forming stars and so what they're
claiming in this paper is that m42 and
the stars that have created that big
beautiful cavity and the glow of the
dust and gas in m42 wouldn't exist if
not for M 43 the piddly little guy and
so basically those shocks in that
collision have triggered the formation
of the hottest stars in M 42 the Oh
stars so the ones in this first image
where we said this was m43 this is M 42
here you'll see this huge clump of stars
here and these are the hottest stars
he's what we call oh stars and they're
incredibly hot they're so much more
massive than our Sun and then radiation
from those is what's caused this
beautiful cavity I'm 42 now those of you
that will remember Megan's video on M 42
from a couple years ago will remember
that she said that it is literally just
down to one of the O stars in M 42 one
of the hottest stars that's giving off
so much radiation so it's created such a
grand structure in M 42 and that O star
has been triggered its formation by the
collision with M 43 I guess m-43
shouldn't be the overlooked sort of
psychic of M 42 anymore it should they
should be taken together because they
wouldn't exist without each other
that is a really cool name that's better
than unknown E
yeah okay the ringbearer mr. Frodo